.\" wrktr.1 — manual page for the wrktr shell worktree manager
.\" Install: cp wrktr.1 ~/.local/share/man/man1/ && man -W ~/.local/share/man/man1
.TH WRKTR 1 "2024" "wrktr 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
wrktr \- branch-as-directory git worktree session manager
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B source
.I /path/to/worktree-functions.sh
.PP
wrktr is sourced into the current shell, not run as a command.
After sourcing, the following functions become available:
.PP
.nf
wrktr_clone <url> [destination]
wrktr_adopt [path]
wrktr_init
wrktr_generate [name]
wrktr_use <name>
wrktr_add <branch> [base-ref]
wrktr_checkout <branch>
wrktr_go [branch]
wrktr_remove <branch>
wrktr_rebase
wrktr_push
wrktr_status
wrktr_help [command]
.fi
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
wrktr treats git branches as persistent directories rather than transient checkout
states.
Each branch gets its own directory on disk.
Switching between branches is
.BR cd (1),
not
.BR "git checkout" .
.PP
The underlying structure uses a
.I bare repository
\(em a git database with no working tree of its own.
All branch checkouts are equal linked worktrees pointing back to the same database.
.PP
A typical layout:
.PP
.nf
~/projects/myapp/
    .wrktr/             bare git database
    main/               linked worktree for main
    feature%2Flogin/    linked worktree for feature/login
.fi
.PP
Every wrktr function is prefixed
.B wrktr_
(public) or
.B _wrktr_
(internal).
Run any command with
.B \-\-help
for inline documentation:
.B wrktr_add\ \-\-help
.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.TP
.B bash 3.2 or later
The macOS system bash (3.2.57) is sufficient. bash 4+ is not required.
.TP
.B git 2.7 or later
.B git worktree list \-\-porcelain
is required by
.BR wrktr_status .
git 2.36 or later is required by
.BR wrktr_init .
.TP
.B rsync
Required only by
.BR wrktr_init .
.
.SH INSTALLATION
.nf
git clone https://github.com/your-username/wrktr.git
cd wrktr
./install.sh
.fi
.PP
.B install.sh
copies
.I worktree-functions.sh
to
.I ~/.local/lib/wrktr/
and appends a
.B source
line to the detected shell profile.
.PP
To install manually, add to
.I ~/.zshrc
or
.IR ~/.bash_profile :
.PP
.nf
source /path/to/worktree-functions.sh
.fi
.
.SH PROJECT SETUP
.
.SS wrktr_clone
Clone an existing remote repository into the wrktr structure.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_clone <url> [destination]
.fi
.PP
Creates a bare clone, fixes the fetch refspec, detects the main branch, and creates
the initial worktree.
After cloning, run
.B wrktr_generate
then
.BR wrktr_use .
.
.SS wrktr_adopt
Convert an existing normal git clone to the wrktr structure.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_adopt [path]
.fi
.PP
Creates a bare clone from an existing repo.
The original clone is not modified.
.
.SS wrktr_init
Initialize a bare repository from a new local project with no remote.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_init
.fi
.PP
Interactive.
Requires the project root and a
.I main/
worktree directory to already exist.
After init, run
.B wrktr_generate
then
.BR wrktr_use .
.
.SS wrktr_generate
Create a session config at
.IR ~/.config/wrktr/<name>.env .
.PP
.nf
wrktr_generate [name]
.fi
.PP
Prompts for session name, trunk path, remote name, and main branch.
Configs are plain
.B KEY=value
text files.
.
.SS wrktr_remote_add
Add a remote to the bare repository.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_remote_add <name> <url>
.fi
.PP
Sets the correct fetch refspec automatically.
.
.SH SESSION MANAGEMENT
.
.SS wrktr_use
Load a session config into the current shell.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_use <name>
.fi
.PP
Parses
.IR ~/.config/wrktr/<name>.env ,
exports session variables, and validates.
On failure, all variables are unset.
Sessions are shell-scoped.
.
.SS wrktr_list
List all available session configs.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_list
.fi
.
.SS wrktr_current
Show the loaded session's configuration values.
.
.SS wrktr_config_show
Display the path and raw contents of the loaded session config file.
.
.SS wrktr_config_edit
Open the loaded session config in
.B $EDITOR
(falls back to
.BR vi ).
Runs
.B wrktr_validate
after the editor closes.
.
.SS wrktr_status
Show all active worktrees: branch name, commits ahead/behind, dirty state, path.
.
.SS wrktr_validate
Validate the loaded session. Called automatically before most commands.
.
.SH DAILY OPERATIONS
.
.SS wrktr_add
Create a new branch and worktree, then
.BR cd (1)
into it.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_add <branch> [base-ref]
.fi
.PP
.I base-ref
defaults to
.B origin/<main-branch>
when a remote is configured,
or
.B <main-branch>
without one.
.
.SS wrktr_checkout
Create a local worktree for a branch that already exists on the remote.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_checkout <branch>
.fi
.PP
Fetches first, verifies the branch exists, creates the worktree with upstream tracking,
and
.BR cd (1)
in.
.
.SS wrktr_go
Navigate to a worktree by branch name.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_go [branch]
.fi
.PP
Handles percent-encoding automatically so
.B wrktr_go feature/login
navigates to
.IR feature%2Flogin/ .
With no argument, displays
.B wrktr_status
and usage.
.
.SS wrktr_base
Navigate to the trunk directory where all worktrees are visible.
.
.SS wrktr_update
Fetch from the configured remote without touching any worktree.
Called automatically by
.BR wrktr_add ,
.BR wrktr_rebase ,
and
.BR wrktr_checkout .
.
.SS wrktr_rebase
Fetch and rebase the current branch onto the latest main.
Must be run from inside a worktree.
Refuses if the working tree has uncommitted changes.
.
.SS wrktr_push
Push the current branch to the configured remote.
Refuses to push the main branch.
Prompts before retrying with
.B \-\-force\-with\-lease
if the push is rejected.
.
.SS wrktr_remove
Remove a worktree and optionally delete the branch ref.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_remove <branch>
.fi
.PP
Refuses to remove the main branch.
Refuses if there are uncommitted changes in the worktree.
.
.SH GIT ACCESS
.
.SS wrktr_git
Run any git command against the bare database.
.PP
.nf
wrktr_git <args>
.fi
.PP
Automatically supplies
.BR \-\-git\-dir .
Use from outside a worktree; from inside, plain
.BR git (1)
works without it.
.
.SS wrktr
Raw passthrough to
.BR "git worktree" .
.PP
.nf
wrktr list
wrktr prune
.fi
.
.SH DRY-RUN MODE
.TP
.B wrktr_dryrun_enable
Enable dry-run mode. Mutating commands print what they would do without executing.
Validation still runs.
.TP
.B wrktr_dryrun_disable
Disable dry-run mode.
.TP
.B wrktr_dryrun_status
Show whether dry-run is active.
.
.SH HELP
.TP
.B wrktr_help
List all commands with one-line descriptions.
.TP
.B "wrktr_help <command>"
Show full documentation for a single command.
Accepts both short names
.RB ( add )
and full names
.RB ( wrktr_add ).
.PP
Every command also accepts
.B \-\-help
as its first argument:
.nf
wrktr_add \-\-help
.fi
.
.SH LIFECYCLE
.TP
.B wrktr_unload
Remove all wrktr functions and
.B WRKTR_*
variables from the current shell.
.TP
.B wrktr_reload
Unload and re-source from the original path. Useful after editing
.IR worktree-functions.sh .
.TP
.B wrktr_prompt_info
Output a context string for embedding in
.BR PS1 .
Prints
.B [name:branch]
inside a worktree,
.B [name]
in a session but outside a worktree, and nothing when no session is loaded.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WRKTR_VERSION
Version string. Set at source time.
.TP
.B WRKTR_NAME
Loaded project name. Matches the config filename.
.TP
.B WRKTR_BASE_TRUNK
Absolute path to the trunk directory containing
.I .wrktr
and all worktrees.
.TP
.B WRKTR_BASE_DIR
Absolute path to the bare git database.
Passed as
.B \-\-git\-dir
to every git command.
.TP
.B WRKTR_REMOTE
Git remote name. Empty for local-only projects.
.TP
.B WRKTR_MAIN_BRANCH
Primary integration branch name.
.TP
.B WRKTR_DRY_RUN
.B 1
when dry-run is active;
.B 0
otherwise.
.TP
.B WRKTR_REPO_DIR_NAME
Name of the bare git database directory. Default:
.IR .wrktr .
Set before sourcing to override. Affects only project creation commands.
.TP
.B WRKTR_SOURCE_PATH
Absolute path to
.I worktree-functions.sh
as loaded. Used by
.BR wrktr_reload .
.TP
.B WRKTR_CONFIG_DIR
Directory containing session configs. Default:
.IR ~/.config/wrktr .
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/wrktr/<name>.env
Session config files.
Plain
.B KEY=value
text, not executed.
Created with mode 600.
.TP
.I ~/.local/lib/wrktr/worktree-functions.sh
Default install location used by
.BR install.sh .
.
.SH BRANCH ENCODING
Slashes in branch names would create nested directories.
wrktr percent-encodes branch names for use as directory names:
.B %
is encoded as
.B %25
first, then
.B /
as
.BR %2F .
.PP
.TS
l l .
Branch name	Directory name
main	main
feature/login	feature%2Flogin
fix/crash-100%	fix%2Fcrash-100%25
.TE
.PP
All
.B wrktr_*
commands accept unencoded branch names.
.BR wrktr_go (1)
handles encoding automatically.
.
.SH DELETION SAFETY
Every
.B rm -rf
operation in wrktr resolves the target to its real absolute path via
.BR "pwd -P" ,
verifies it is inside the expected project root, and requires explicit confirmation
before proceeding.
.B wrktr_remove
delegates to
.BR "git worktree remove" .
.
.SH EXAMPLES
Clone and set up a project:
.PP
.nf
wrktr_clone https://github.com/user/myapp.git
wrktr_generate myapp
wrktr_use myapp
.fi
.PP
Start and finish a branch:
.PP
.nf
wrktr_add feature/login
# ... work ...
wrktr_push
wrktr_remove feature/login
.fi
.PP
Check status across all branches:
.PP
.nf
wrktr_status
.fi
.PP
Preview what a command would do without running it:
.PP
.nf
wrktr_dryrun_enable
wrktr_add feature/test
wrktr_dryrun_disable
.fi
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1),
.BR git-worktree (1),
.BR bash (1)
.PP
Full documentation:
.I wrktr.md
in the repository root.
.
.SH AUTHOR
wrktr contributors.
.PP
Source and issue tracker:
.I https://github.com/your-username/wrktr
.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See
.I LICENSE
in the repository root.
